# Heart-Disease
**Introduction and Problem Statement**
The triggers and treatment of cardiac arrest have been researched for many years, and new findings are under development. However, new findings suggest that it might not be prudent to specifically restrict the consumption of dietary concentrated trans-fats or supplement them with polyunsaturated trans-fats while taking into consideration certain health conditions [1]. The most important task in the profession of healthcare is the detection of illness. If an illness is diagnosed early, a lot of lives can be spared. Machine learning recognition methods may make a significant contribution to the medical profession by providing accurate and efficient diagnosis of diseases. Several complications are emerging at a gradual rate and developing disorders of the heart are quickly detected [2] [19]. 
The well-being of the core of an adult is based solely on the perception of how a person lives, which depends entirely on the professed and individualized actions of the person. There might be a variety of genetic fundamentals through which a form of heart disease has been spread over decades [3]. Cardiac disorders are more common in men than in women. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) statistics, reports show that 24 per cent of mortality are caused by non-transmissible illnesses in India, which take place because of heart attacks [3].
In this study, criteria such as heart rate, blood pressure, gender, diabetes, age and so on are used in the prediction and diagnosis of heart disease. The prediction of this condition is difficult since multiple causes are involved in heart disease. Many of the main heart disease signs include: • Sweating and fatigue. • Chest tightness. • Pressure in the upper back pain that spreads to the arm.
• Nausea, indigestion, heartburn, or stomach pain. • Shortness of breath. The mode of cardiac attack is as follows: ‘cardio' is indicated by the heart. All cardiac disorders thereby influence the division of coronary diseases. Coronary heart disease is classified into various forms [4]:
• Angina pectoris • Coronary heart disease • Congenital heart diseases • Congestive heart failure • Cardiomyopathy Heart disease is an exhaustive term for a fraction of illnesses, accidents and conditions in the heart and blood vessels. Symptoms of heart diseases.

“Data is the new science. Big Data holds the answers.” –Pat Gelsinger Rising healthcare costs have 
been a major issue for developed nations. (Dadgostar, 2019). According to CDC, an estimated 
859,000 people in the US die from cardiovascular disease or 1 in every 3 deaths. Cardiovascular
 diseases cost $216 billion in the healthcare system and $147 lost in productivity (Mayo, 2022).
 This cost has been a major concern in the US, and therefore early detection is important.
 In light of the rapid advancement of biotechnology, and an era of big data generated for healthcare 
by mainly EHR(electronic health records) in various structures, it is increasingly more important to
 intelligently use this information to make sense of hidden patterns, detect abnormalities, and 
predict heart diseases. Artificial intelligence has certainly made computers smarter. Machine
 learning which is a subset of artificial intelligence plays an important role in mining large datasets and extracting valuable knowledge from them. Training a machine appropriately with proper train data set, the machine’s algorithm can learn patterns and therefore detect any abnormalities in the initial stage of a disease which can help patients save overall cost and time. This project will examine the opportunities of machine learning and data mining in the healthcare industry especially in heart diseases, how early diagnosis can minimize healthcare costs; and how data generated by EHR can provide insights for medical professionals in terms of detecting abnormalities for potential chronic diseases. We begin by providing a brief research background, followed by the problem statement, research questions, objectives, and the organization of this culminating experience project. Heart Disease Cardiovascular diseases are the dominant cause of cost and disease burden in the world. (Roth et al., 2020). Cardiovascular diseases refer to any disorder in the heart and blood vessels. Major blood vessels that supply to the heart muscles are affected by a heart condition. These blood vessels build up on cholesterol deposits called plaque reducing blood flow to major parts of the body and the heart (Heart disease, 2022). Over time if left untreated, this can lead to stroke, heart attack, or heart failure. Heart diseases are considered silent killers and at times not diagnosed until life-threatening symptoms start to emerge. Diagnosis of these diseases can include various blood tests, MRIs and CT scans, ECGs, or Holter monitoring. All this medical big data is collected and stored in various databases, which do not provide value on their own, but if integrated and analyzed using Artificial Intelligence, machine learning and data mining techniques it is possible to generate diagnostic information that can lives while minimizing costs. Machine Learning: In the modern era, humans are experiencing exponential growth of data like never before. With the availability of online data and inexpensive computational computer power, machine learning algorithms can learn and develop models without human intervention (Jordan & Mitchell, 2015). Machine learning, a subset of artificial intelligence, can collect meaningful 2 knowledge from its training data and automatically improve through exposure without having to be programmed. The machine’s algorithm can be classified into four main types, which are Supervised, Unsupervised, Semi-supervised, and Reinforcement Learning (Sarker, 2021). Supervised Learning can be split into two categories: Classification and Regression. Unsupervised learning can be classified into Clustering and Association (Delua, 2021). Both learning approaches are mainly distinguished by using labeled or unlabeled datasets to anticipate the outcome. Each of these has a distinctive set of guidelines when applied to medical data and effectively using it will help extract vital knowledge (Gupta et al., 2021). Medical Big Data: Big data can be categorized as any data set that is too extensive, complex, and diverse to be handled by typical desktop software (Camm et al.,2021). As medical information technology advances, so do various forms of medical data. Medical big data is widely used to improve healthcare quality. Such data include audio, lab tests, previous diagnostic reports, clinical records, research, and images (Sun et al., 2019). There are various sources of these data which are stored in different datasets. However, extracting value from a single dataset can be undesirable, but can attain excellent insights by potentially linking various datasets (Lee & Yoon, 2017). A medical data warehouse serves as the centralized repository for the medical data recovered from various data sources such as lab databases, electronic health records (EHR), electronic medical records (EMR), and it has the potential to provide better insights than the analysis of data in a single database.

**Problem Statement**
The problem statement for the present work can be stated as follows:
Modern information technology tools and techniques such as AI, machine learning and data mining could help support healthcare professionals by providing them with the information they need to make decisions that will minimize deaths caused by heart disease at minimal cost. For example, machine learning algorithms can mine large databases to identify frequent patterns that eventually lead to heart disease and death.
